# Zoe Changelog

## Version 2017.03

* Major documentation update
* Deployment scripts to install Zoe on Linux (Kubernetes or Swarm back-ends) or Windows
* Kubernetes back-end
* Updated Swarm backend, uses the new Docker Python API
* Zoe code now goes through an automated testing pipeline
* Added unit and integration tests
* Preview of the new AngularJS front-end

## Version 0.10.2

* Documentation updates
* Log management bug fixes
* Fix a bug with the scheduler time trigger
* Sort by ID when listing execution from the command-line client

## Version 0.10.1

* Service discovery API endpoint: simple, read-only, unauthenticated access to a list of DNS names of services. Needed for frameworks that need a list of hosts for configuration, can be used by scripts in the images.
* Add `-s` option to the `start` command of the commandline client to have it wait for execution termination and stream the log meanwhile.
* Add the `workspace-deployment-path` option in the configuration file. It should be used when the workspace path should be build not with the deployment name, but with something else.
* All errors generated by docker while creating containers are now considered as fatal, except the "not enough free resource" one. When a fatal error is generated, Zoe will not try to start the execution again.
* Error messages generated by Docker are now exposed to the user
* (experimental) if the configuration option `service-log-path` is set, container output is saved from docker into the specified directory. If the logs are big, this can have a significant impact on execution termination time

## Version 0.10.0

* This version is the start of a new series of releases moving toward a new architecture
* Only one overlay network (created by the sysadmin) will be used by all Zoe executions. We provide Dockerfiles for SOCKS and SSHd containers that can be used to give users access inside the Zoe overlay network. These containers will no longer be managed by Zoe.
* Move the REST API in the web process and add a ZeroMQ-based API between the web and the master.
* Move all user management in the web process.
* Use Postgresql to store the state
* Rename the zoe-web component in zoe-api to better describe its new role
* User authentication can be performed by a CSV text file or via LDAP

## Version 0.9.7

* Check application description version during validation.
* Bump application description version to 2 since we are going to make some major changes in the format
* Add fields `total_count`, `essential_count` and `startup_order` to service descriptions.
* Comment code related to the parsing of cluster statistics from Swarm. The data returned by API changes too often and parsing it consistently is too complex. A bug is open on the Swarm issue tracker.

## Version 0.9.6

* Workspaces: Zoe now supports starting containers with a directory from the hosts mounted as a volume. The directory is private for the user and is not wiped when the Zoe execution terminates. There are some issues with file permissions when the container images define users with arbitrary UIDs.
* Add an error status and error message visible to the user when Zoe fails starting an execution
* Add a Docker Compose file to help test deployments
* The gateway container image is now configurable
* Move applications to their own repository (zoe-applications)
* Move the Zoe logger code into its own repository
* Update the stats module to the latest Docker version. Since the Python Docker API refuses to provide machine readable output, we have to stay locked to Docker versions
* Add date and time to log output produced by Zoe processes
* Expand the web interface, users can now list, start, terminate and restart executions
